(upbeat music)
All right folks, now we are gonna build tabs.
Tabs are pretty simple, you click on the tab that you want,
and it shows the content that is associated with it.
This is a great example, because it's going
to get us into hiding and showing things,
it's going to get us into event listeners,
we're gonna do a little bit of looping
before we've even learned it, and most importantly
we're also going to learn how to make this accessible.
So you see, if I use my keyboard, I can tab over to each
of these tabs without having to use my mouse.
So, where do you start? For awesome tabs, you start
with some awsome HTML. Let's go over
what we're starting with right here real quick,
we've got our div class of tabs, that's just a div
that wraps the entire thing, and then we've got
the tab list here, now you're going to notice a lot
of these role and aria labels here, and this is important
because this is how you make your tabs accessible
to everyone, as well as this is how you make sure
that your content is easily read by search engines,
because if you've got content hidden behind a search engine
about PHB, how's google gonna know how to get to that?
Well, if you use a proper markup, then it's good for both
accessibility as well as SCO.
So we've got this tab list here, we tell the browser
that it is a tab list by saying it has the role
of a tab list, and then we give it a label,
which is programming languages.
That's just for screen readers to know
what is this list about.
And then inside of each of those,
they just have three buttons, and each of those buttons
has a role of tab and id of what programming language
it's associated with, and then finally this aria selected
attribute here, and that's how we are going
to maintain whether that tab is currently active.
You see, the first one is set to true,
and the others are set to false.
Now, if we take a look at our tabs dot css here,
you'll see that whenever a button has an attribute
of aria selected, then go ahead and change the background
to yellow, take off the box shadow,
change the color of the text.
Now, totally separate from that, so what's cool about this
is that we're not actually worried about where to put
the tabs and the buttons, because as long as they
are sort of clicked together by the id
and the aria labeled by of the actual tab panel,
then those things are connected.
So, I'll go down here and now I've got
all of our different tabs, each of these
are called a tab panel, and then we can associate
that tab panel with a specific button
by giving it an aria labeled by.
So again, this is just descriptions,
this is not giving us any sort of functionality
in the browser, this is just a good way to describe
markup in the browser. So here we go,
and then we apply an attribute of hidden,
this little hidden attribute is great,
because you don't have to write any like class
that will hide it, you simply just pop on or off
the hidden attribute, and it will show and hide,
like watch if I take this off,
we'll see that we now have two tab panels.
So our default state is to show the first tab as selected,
and show the first tab panel as shown.
That's it! Let's write some code here.
So go out into our tabs here, and we're going
to need the tabs div itself, and then we will also
need our buttons and our panels,
so const, tabs is equal to document dot query selector,
grab the tabs, and then we'll grab the buttons,
and here I'm not going to say document,
I'm going to say tabs dot query selector, and we're going
to look inside of that for anything that has a role
of tab on it, and the reason why I look inside of tabs
is because it's likely that you're going
to have multiple tabs on the same page, and being able
to write your Javascript in such a way that this can
be reused for any number of tabs, this is gonna set us up
for doing that, so that's good.
Then we need the tab panels, and that is going
to be queryselectorAll, both of them are queryselectorAll,
and then we're gonna look for one
that has a role of tab panel.
Now what we'll do is we'll take our tab buttons,
and we'll listen for each one, so we'll say .forEach button,
we'll say button .addEventListener, we're going to listen
for a click, and remember that because they are buttons,
the click event will fire when the user uses the keyboard
as well, so there's no extra keyboard work
that need's to be done here, and we'll make a function
called handleTabClick. up here, make that function
called handleTabClick, get our event,
and let's just console log the event.
What are you yelling at in here? Gotta spell it right!
There we go. Going to our console here,
querySelectorall is not a function,
it sure isn't, here we go, now if I click
on each of the tabs, it gives us our event,
we can go here and here and say event.currentTarget,
like we've always done, and you can see each
of the different buttons. Awesome.
Awesome, Awesome, Awesome. Now, (laughs), now,
we're gonna get a little bit ahead of ourselves
into looping, but that's fine, I think we can handle this.
So, I think its worth learning a bit of this looping
before we dig into the nitty gritty,
so you can sort of see some spots where we would use it
in real life, so couple of things we need to do here,
when somebody clicks on a tab,
first thing we need to do is hide all
of the other tab panels, so hide all tab panels.
Then we need to mark all tabs as unselected,
or what's the word that we use? Let's use a better word.
It is selected. Yeah. Unselected, that's good. Okay.
Then we need to mark this tab as selected,
and this tab or the clicked, lets call it the clicked tab
as selected, and then we also need to find
the associated tab panel and show it.
And, I think that's it! All right,
so let's take this one by one, I like to call this
pseudocode, meaning that like just write down
what you're trying to do, so you can kind of grasp
what are the steps that need to happen
when somebody clicks it, and then we can go one by one
and write the code for us. So, first hide all
of the tab panels, okay, well there's a couple ways
we have all the tab panels right here,
so console log, tab panels. I click on one of these,
you get a nodelist with three of these divs, right,
like how are we hiding these tab panels?
Well, they're getting an attribute of hidden,
so all we can do here is we can loop over each of them
with our dot for each, and for each of those
we will hide it, so we'll say tabPanels dot forEach,
and we'll say each panel, now let's do a regular function
then we'll show you how to make an arrow function.
So each panel, lets just console.log the panel,
so what this will do is it's gonna take our nodelist
of three panels, loop over each one,
and then for each one we'll get a variable called panel,
which is how we reference each of them,
and then we can console log it.
So if I click on one tab, we get three separate
console logs of each of them, right? One, two, three.
One, two, three. Good. So let's get rid of this console log,
let's get rid of that, and simply all we need to do here
is we need to take the panel,
which is going to be our element, and we will say hidden
is equal to true. All right? Does that work? Let's try it.
Boom! So you see as soon as I click on any tab,
all of the panels then turn to hidden.
So there's that one, there's that one, and there's that one.
Right? So that's the first thing. Just hide them all.
And then the next one is to go back,
and unselect one of them, and we could filter for ones
that are not associated with the current one,
and only hide that one, but in my experience
it's much easier to just hide them all,
and then show the one that we want,
I find that's a bit easier. Oh, I was going
to show you how to make this into an arrow function
right here, so we'll take the word function,
remove it, we'll put a little arrow here,
and we'll get rid of the parentheses here,
and we could leave it at that, and give it a save,
and that will totally work, and most people do that,
you can also just make it a one liner here,
but that is with the implicit returning, you see that
it puts parentheses around it, because you shouldn't,
you're not actually returning anything,
you're just running this code here.
So I'll bring it back to the curly brackets,
so don't be a hero and try and make it as short as possible,
be a hero and make your code as readable as possible.
So, I like that. So that doesn't break anything,
no, things are still working.
Now, what we need to do is mark all tabs as unselected,
so we'll take our tabs, and we'll go over for each tab,
and we'll take that tab and we will hide it.
So, we'll say button, so take the tab,
and lets look quickly at our thing here,
we are setting the aria selected attribute.
So, how do you, how do you set something that is,
like can I do this? That aria-selected is equal to false?
Is this gonna work? Invalid left-hand side in assignment.
All right, I guess you can't put dash in,
so how do you access a property when the property itself
has a dash in it? Well, let's go ahead and select one
of these buttons here, and just reference it
with our dollar zero trick, and if we type in dash
ariaSelected, oh, you see what happened there is
that the aria selected property is turned from a dash
into camel K. So, any time that you see a dash attribute
on an HDML element, you can almost always access that
with the camel K version of that.
So lets go here, we'll change
that to aria selected equals false,
and now I want to click on one of them, boom!
Oh. forEach is not a function. tabs that forEach.
Why not? Oh, it's not tabs, it's tabButtons.
That didn't work. Mark all tabs as unselected.
So if I go to this button here, and I grab the ariaSelected,
it says false, but it's not updating.
Oh, this is a little, a little problem that we have here,
this button had the ariaSelected property as false,
but if I look at the button here,
it says ariaSelected equals true. They never updated.
So what happened here is that the ariaSelected property,
and for most properties in Javascript,
you can just access the property on the element directly,
however, for some properties, that is included
in custom properties that you just made up,
as well as aria properties. It looks like you can't use
this method, and the only other way
is to use the dot set attribute method,
and I was just pulling up the docs here,
it says set attribute, note for cross browser compatibility,
always use the warrior attribute selected
to access aria properties, so set attribute
and get attribute. Method on the element instead
of the properties. So again, in most cases,
if it's like an alt or source, or a title,
those things can be done via properties on the element,
but for aria attributes, we must use
the set attributes method. So say tab dot set attribute,
aria selected, and we'll set that to false.
So that's a good little learning lesson there,
but now, there we go, you see that now when I click it,
it will actually remove the, see, this is true,
watch, ready ready ready ready, boom. It turns to false
when we click it. Okay, good. So we did that,
we hid all the tab panels, we marked
all the tabs as unselected, now we need to mark
the clicked tab as selected. That's going to be easy,
so we'll just say event dot current target dot set attribute
aria selected is equal to true.
Ah-ha, you see? Now when I click one,
it will simply set and remove the artist slightly.
You notice we're not using any classes here,
and the reason behind that is because
if you can reach for an accessibility attribute
over a class, then do that, because then you don't
have to double time and maintain classes as well as aria.
Just use aria, select your elements with aria,
style your elements with aria, and you're in good shape.
What else do we have here? Find the associated tab panel
and show it. Okay, so now here's the thing,
here's the scoop that we need to do.
If somebody clicks on a button with an id of Javascript,
we need to find the div that has, we need to find
the associated tab panel that has an aria labelledby
that matches it. Right, okay.
So, we could do this a couple of ways.
First, lets grab that id. So console log, const id
is equal to event dot current target dot id.
You see what happened there is that my,
instead of making a variable that is set to
the same property on something, when I give it a save
it will use the structuring to create an id variable
from that thing. And that's handy if you ever want
to pull other properties off of maybe an alt, or a source,
or something like that. So that's why that
gets changed there, and let's just console log the id,
got ruby, got JS, got PHP. Looking good!
Okay, so now we need to find the associated tab panel,
there's a couple ways that we could do this.
We could simply just use that id in a selector,
so const tab panel is equal to document,
or maybe we'll grab tabs, query selector,
and we'll use back text here,
and we'll say anything with an id of id,
and then we'll say tab panel dot hidden is equal to false.
So this is just sort of a dynamics selector,
it will select on time, and that didn't work. Why?
Well, lets go ahead and console log the tab panel,
we got the tab panel, oh no! We don't want anything
with an id of, we want something with the aria labeledby,
is that what it is? Aria labeledby is equal to that id,
close square bracket.
Now we're not finding this tab panel is equal to null,
okay, now why is that? Well, lets just go in here.
Oh my gosh, did I spell it wrong? Oh my gosh. All right.
That's embarrassing. So, I'm a good programmer,
just not a good speller, apparently. There we go,
and then we just take the hidden to false. Boom, boom, boom.
Okay, so now we can change that ruby out to be a variable,
which is the id, and now we see that the tabs are working.
So, that's one way to do it, another way,
let's comment this out, so say method one.
So our second way is to use find, so basically we
can take these tab panels, and we can just loop over it
until we find the one that we want. That's pretty good,
because you can take a list of something,
and then look inside of it for whatever it is that you want,
and it will return you the actual item.
So it will say method two, find in the array of tab panels.
So we'll take tab panels, and we'll call
the dot find method on it, and what's going to happen.
We're going to get an error, it says cannot read property
find. There we go, tab panels dot find is not a function.
Okay, so it's not a function. Why not?
And that's because a find method is actually only
a method on arrays, and if we were to console log
these tab panels, you'll see it's not actually an array,
it's something called a nodelist,
that does not have all of the methods
that an array would have. So, no problem there,
what we can do is you can actually turn this tab panels
from a nodelist into an array by simply just wrapping it
in capital A array dot from, and that will turn it
into a true array. Again, we'll go a little more
into that in once we hit arrays,
but now, watch this, it will run the find,
it gives us this error because we haven't passed it
a callback function just yet, it will work.
So what we can do with the find is
we can take each panel, and we can say
if the panel dot get attribute aria labeledby
is equal to the id, we don't have that id variable
any more, oh yeah we do, we got the variable right here,
so if the aria labeledby is equal to the id,
then return true. Otherwise, we will return,
ah lets leave it like this. You'll see I've got
a little squiggle there because it's upset about something,
but we'll learn about why that is.
It wants me to return false or use an implicit return here,
and what we can actually do is if we instead of just saying
if the panel get attribute is equal to id,
we can actually just return that,
this is going to be true, so then we don't have
to return true, we can simply just return the value
of this, which will either be true or false,
so we can get rid of that, get rid of that,
get rid of these curly brackets,
and simply just return that. Now, this is a little bit more
of an advanced way, but we do use this quite a bit,
so we are going to find the panel where
the panel's labeledby is equal to the id,
and then we can store the result of that,
we'll call it tab panel, in a variable,
and then we'll console log the tab panel ourselves.
Now when I click on it, you'll see we get
the associated ruby, PHP tab panel,
the Javascript tab panel, and we can simply say
tab panel dot hidden is equal to false.
So, two different ways to go about it,
I prefer this find method because we already have
the tab panel, there's no need to go ahead
and find it again, but honestly it doesn't really matter
at the end of the day which one you want,
and now our tabs are working beautifully.
So, woo! That is tab panels, it's surprisingly simple,
maybe twenty-five lines of code, maybe a little bit less
to do tabs, and this is one of those things
that you sort of just keep, you're gonna do tabs
at some point in your career, and you can go back
and grab this little code to use it, and that.